docs(adr): ADR #009: Telemetry (#901)
celestiaorg/celestia-node: docs/adr/adr-009-telemetry.md

# ADR #009: Telemetry

## Changelog

* 2022-07-4: Started
* 2022-07-10: Initial Draft finished

## Authors 

@Wondertan @liamsi

## Context

> > Now I know why I don't like writing ADRs - because I cannot run/test them and see if they work or not.

Reviewer: 😄 Actually, sometimes you can, by writing a PoC / tracer / prototype implementation of what you plan to do, or. if necessary of the different alternatives.

> Hoping that quality team feedback will solve this problem!

Celestia Node needs deeper observability of each module and their components. The only integrated observability solution 
we have is logging and there are two more options we need to explore from the observability triangle(tracing, metrics and logs).

There are several priorities and "why"s we need deeper observability:

> * Analysis of the current p2p share exchange or "ShrEx" stack

Author: I will just expand it as “share exchange”. There nothin I can't link here

> * Analysis of the current p2p share exchange or "ShrEx" stack

Reviewer: Are we sure there is no ADR that introduces ShrEx or share exchange as a concept? Or even just a link to a doc.go?

> * Analysis of the current p2p share exchange or "ShrEx" stack

Author: Nope, IIRC, we discussed this term in Kyiv but it was never really referred so until recently. More like DASing and something between IPLD and Bitswap

  * So we can evaluate real world Full Node reconstruction qualities, along with data availability sampling
  * And unblock celestia-node development planning
* Incentivized Testnet
  * Tracking participants and validation that do task correctly
  * So all participants provide to us valuable data/insight/traces that we can analyze and improve on

> * Monitoring of the Celestia's own DA network infrastructure, e.g. DA Network Bootstrappers

Author: I will combine them into one with sub points

> * Monitoring of the Celestia's own DA network infrastructure, e.g. DA Network Bootstrappers

Author: Done

* Monitoring dashboard for the node operators

> * Extend debugging arsenal for the networking heavy DA layer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Extend debugging arsenal for the networking-heavy DA layer
```
```suggestion
* Extend debugging arsenal for the networking heavy DA layer
```

  * Local development
  * Issues found with Testground
  * Production
* Establishing metrics/data driven engineering culture for celestia-node devs
  * Metrics and tracing allows extracting dry facts out of any software on its performance, liveness, bottlenecks,
    regressions, etc., on whole system scale, so devs can reliably respond
  * Basing on these, all the improvements can be proven with data _before_ and _after_ a change

This ADR is intended to outline the decisions on how to proceed with:
* Integration plan according to the priorities and the requirements
* What observability tools/dependencies to integrate
* Integration design into Celestia-Node for each observability option
* A reference document explaining "whats" and "hows" during integration in some part of the codebase, e.g. new dev

## Decisions

### Plan

The first "ShrEx" stack analysis priority is critical for Celestia project. The analysis results will tell us whether

> our current Full Node reconstruction qualities conforms to the main network requirements, subsequently affecting 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
our current Full Node reconstruction qualities conforms to mainnet requirements, subsequently affecting 
```

Author: Hmm,  I like verbosity in this case

> the development roadmap of the celestia-node before the main network launch, therefore is a potential blocker to the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the development roadmap of the celestia-node before the main network launch.
```

> launch, which needs to be resolved ASAP. Basing on the former, the plan is focused on unblocking the reconstruction 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Basing on the former, the plan is focused on unblocking the reconstruction 
```
```suggestion
launch, which needs to be resolved ASAP. Basing on the former, the plan is focused on unblocking the reconstruction 
```

> story first and then proceed with steady covering of our codebase with traces for the complex codepaths as well as 

Reviewer 2: pls link reconstruction issue/story

Author: I guess we need to create one for tracing coverage

Reviewer: but you could also just link to the blcok reconstruction issue s.t. new hires can look into what is meant by "the reconstruction story" independently of tracing.

Author: Linked

metrics and dashboards for "measurables".

> Fortunately, the "ShrEx" analysis can be performed with _tracing_ only(more on that in [Tracing](./#Tracing)), so the

Reviewer 2: You can make a `## Legend` section where you define what `ShrEx` is.

Author: Good point

decision for the celestia-node team is to cover with traces only the _necessary_ for the current "ShrEx" stack code as 
the initial response to the ADR, leaving the rest to be integrated in the background for the devs in the team once they 
are free as well as for the efficient bootstrapping into the code for the new devs.

The next biggest priority - incentivized Testnet can be largely covered with traces as well. All participant will submit
traces from their nodes to any provided backend endpoint by us during the whole network lifespan. Later on, we will be 
able to verify the data of each participant by querying historical traces. This is the feature that some backend solutions 

> provide, which we can use as well to extract valuable on how the network performs in macro view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
provide, which we can use as well to extract valuable insight on how the network performs in macro view.
```
```suggestion
provide, which we can use as well to extract valuable on how the network performs in macro view.
```

Author: Hmm, I swear I put data there, but anyway insight sounds better here.

### Tooling/Dependencies

#### Golang API/Shim

The decision is to use [opentelemetry-go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go) for both Metrics and Tracing:
* Minimal and golang savvy API/shim which gathers years of experience from OpenCensus/OpenMetrics and [CNCF](https://www.cncf.io/)
* Backends/exporters for all the existing timeseries monitoring DBs, e.g. Prometheus, InfluxDB. As well as tracing backends
  Jaeger, Uptrace, etc.
* https://github.com/uptrace/opentelemetry-go-extra/tree/main/otelzap with logging engine with use - Zap

The discussion over this decision can be found in [celestia-node#663](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-node/issues/663)
and props to @liamsi for initial kickoff and a deep dive into OpenTelemetry.

#### Tracing Backends

> For the tracing there are 3 modern OSS tools are recommended. All of them have bidirectional support with OpenTelemetry:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For tracing, there are 3 modern OSS tools that are recommended. All of them have bidirectional support with OpenTelemetry:
```

  * The most recent (~1 year)
  * The richest UI
  * Tight to Clickhouse DB
  * Made by OpenTelemetry
  * The most lightweight
* [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/)
  * The most mature
  * Started by Uber, now supported by CNCF
  * Supports multiple storages(ScyllaDB, InfluxDB, Amazon DynamoDB)
* [Graphana Tempo](https://grafana.com/oss/tempo/)
  * Deep integration with Graphana/Prometheus
  * Relatively new (~2 years)
  * Uses Azure, GCS, S3 or local disk for storage

Each of these backends can be used independently and depending on the use case. For us, these are main use cases: 
* Local development/debugging for the private network or even public network setup
> I am personally planning to set up the lightweight Uptrace for the local light node. Just to play around and observe 
> things
* Data collection from the Testground test runs
* Bootstrappers monitoring infrastructure
* Data collection from the incentivized testnet participants

There is no strict decision on which of these backends and where to use. People taking ownership of any listed vectors
are free to use any recommended solution or any unlisted.

#### Metrics Backend

> // WIP

Author: Yes

> // WIP

Author: > I think this is equally important
Initially, I also thought the same a made a deep dive into metrics, but after doing a deeper dive into tracing and how it is different, I disagree with metrics being important for us in the current state. Now, tracing have a higher priority:
* Easier to integrate. I will try to add here a comparison section 
* Better match for the current requirements. Tracing alone solves both reconstruction and incentivized testnet, while metrics don't.
* Metrics are good to measure things and analyzing performance, finding averages, and providing histograms of isolated processes. Tracing allows you to analyze any operation as the tree of dependencies seeing each step. I feel like I am repeating myself now.

> // WIP

Reviewer: > Better match for the current requirements. Tracing alone solves both reconstruction and incentivized testnet, while metrics don't.

Tracing might be too granular as far I understand. While it "solves" tracing and then optimizing e.g. reconstruction it does not "solve" the incentivized testnet as we certainly want less granular metrics like how long requests took, or resource consumption (e.g. mem/CPU usage) over time. Metrics can be useful for both: a detailed graphana dashboard and potenially also for the incentrivized testnet dashboard.

> Tracing allows you to analyze any operation as the tree of dependencies seeing each step.

Yes, and that is great but we also need less granular metrics to consume directly IMO. We can then correlate them to traces but only if we have them. e.g. memory or CPU spikes. or an increase in the number of incoming share requests, a spike or decrease in the number of connected peers and so forth.

> // WIP

Reviewer: >  I will try to add here a comparison section

I think a short section about this might help to spread awareness for the team what the diff is.

> // WIP

Author: > econstruction it does not "solve" the incentivized testnet as we certainly want less granular metrics like how long requests took, or resource consumption (e.g. mem/CPU usage) over time. 

@liamsi, According to the mock figma board, there won't be any resource consumption related metrics. How long a request is a tracing-related problem. _We still didn't mention at least one metric that is required for incentivized testnet and cannot be solved via metrics._ 

The only one I could think of now is the uptime, but we don't really care about it as long as the node sends 
us traces.

> // WIP

Author: However though, we will have enought time for metrics until incentivised testnet anyway, according to current quarterly roadmap. In the worst case scenario, we will still be able to fulfill incentivized testnet needs with tracing, but it is very unlikely that we will have to.

> // WIP

Reviewer: > According to the mock figma board, there won't be any resource consumption related metrics. 

Yes, this is less about the figma board. Instead, or additionally, we want a more complete telemetry dashboard. It will display some of the traces and I think uptime, CPU and disk usage usage (per node and "global"), and similarly networking IO etc. I do not have an exhaustive list in mind but these are the bare minimal set of metrics I can think of. I am sure we can have sth more specific to the celestia-node software as well. But would need to think about this more. I assume that the node team will do a deep dive into the possible metrics and come up with a more complete list.

## Design

### Tracing

Tracing allows to see _how_ any process progresses through different modules, APIs and networks, as well as timings of 
each operation and any events or errors as they occur.

A visual example of a generic tracing dashboard provided via [Uptrace](https://uptrace.dev/) backend
![tracing](img/tracing-dashboard.png)

> Mainly, for "ShrEx" and reconstruction analysis we need to know if the reconstruction succeeded and the time it took.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mainly, for "ShrEx" and reconstruction analysis, we need to know if the reconstruction succeeded, the time it took and the size of the block (`square width`).
```

Author: The size of the block is not something we get out of the analysis rather than a parameter, so this suggestion is incorrect.

Reviewer: Block sizes will vary depending on usage. Only the max block size is a parameter.

Author: @liamsi, withing reconstruction tests usage is junk data that we configure the test to fill the blocks with thus usage and subsequently block size are the parameters.

Author: Updated the paragraph anyway mentioning block size

> The tracing in this case would provide both for the whole reconstruction operation and for each sub operation of each
> process and the node involved.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The tracing in this case would provide all three metrics for the whole reconstruction operation and for each sub operation of each
process.
```

Reviewer 2: wdym by "sub operation" though?

    span.AddEvent("requesting quadrant", trace.WithAttributes(
        attribute.Int("axis", q.source),
        attribute.Int("x", q.x),
        attribute.Int("y", q.y),
        attribute.Int("size", len(q.roots)),
    ))
```
> The above is only examples related to our code and is a subject to change.

#### Backends connection 

Jaeger example
```go
    // Create the Jaeger exporter
    exp, err := jaeger.New(jaeger.WithCollectorEndpoint(jaeger.WithEndpoint(url)))
    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }
	// then the tracer provider
    tp := tracesdk.NewTracerProvider(
        // Always be sure to batch in production.
        tracesdk.WithBatcher(exp),
        // Record information about this application in a Resource.
        tracesdk.WithResource(resource.NewWithAttributes(
            semconv.SchemaURL,
            semconv.ServiceNameKey.String(service),
            attribute.String("environment", environment),
            attribute.Int64("ID", id),
        )),
    )
	// and set it globally to be used across packages
    otel.SetTracerProvider(tp)
	
	// then close it elsewhere
    tp.Shutdown(ctx)
```

### Metrics

// WIP

## Considerations

* Tracing performance

>   * _Every_ method calling two more functions making network request can affect overall performance

Reviewer 2: meaning this could degrade overall node performance? 

Could we resolve this with having `light || comprehensive` tracing modes eventually?

Author: Yes. IO is expensive. Doing it everywhere degrades overall performance.

# ADR #009: Telemetry

## Changelog

> * 2022-07-4: Started

Author: Fixed

* 2022-07-10: Initial Draft finished
* 2022-07-11: Stylistic improvements

## Authors 

@Wondertan @liamsi

## Legend

> - "ShrEx" - Share Exchange

Author: Done

> It's all ogre now

## Context
> Now I know why I don't like writing ADRs - because I cannot run/test them and see if they work or not.
> Hoping that quality team feedback will solve this problem!

Celestia Node needs deeper observability of each module and their components. The only integrated observability solution 
we have is logging and there are two more options we need to explore from the observability triangle(tracing, metrics and logs).

There are several priorities and "why"s we need deeper observability:
* Analysis of the current p2p share exchange or "ShrEx" stack
  * So we can evaluate real world Full Node reconstruction qualities, along with data availability sampling

>   * And adjust our roadmap accordingly.

Reviewer: nit: consistently use punctuation.

Author: Removed

>   * And adjust our roadmap accordingly.

Author: Cool

>   * And adjust our roadmap accordingly.

Author: Smashed

* Incentivized Testnet

>   * Tracking participants and validation that do task correctly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Tracking participation and progress on incentivized testnet tasks.
```
validators are tracked differently.

Author: @liamsi, This is not about _validators_, but about _validation_ of participants

Author: As we discussed with @YazzyYaz, there is going to be a different set of tasks for which participants will get additional points. They may and may not take this. We need to _verify_ what they claimed to do.

  * So all participants provide to us valuable data/insight/traces that we can analyze and improve on

> * Monitoring dashboars

Author: Was already in my local changes, thanks for catching this anyway.

  * For Celestia's own DA network infrastructure, e.g. DA Network Bootstrappers
  * For the node operators
* Extend debugging arsenal for the networking heavy DA layer
  * Local development
  * Issues found with Testground
  * Production
* Establishing metrics/data driven engineering culture for celestia-node devs
  * Metrics and tracing allows extracting dry facts out of any software on its performance, liveness, bottlenecks,
    regressions, etc., on whole system scale, so devs can reliably respond

>   * Basing on these, all the improvements can be proven with data _before_ and _after_ a change

Reviewer: I think that should be the first bullet point on top.

Author: Changed

This ADR is intended to outline the decisions on how to proceed with:
* Integration plan according to the priorities and the requirements
* What observability tools/dependencies to integrate
* Integration design into Celestia-Node for each observability option
* A reference document explaining "whats" and "hows" during integration in some part of the codebase, e.g. new dev

## Decisions

### Plan

> The first "ShrEx" stack analysis priority is critical for Celestia project. The analysis results will tell us whether

Author: I think it is a good stylistic suggestion

our current Full Node reconstruction qualities conforms to the main network requirements, subsequently affecting 
the development roadmap of the celestia-node before the main network launch, therefore is a potential blocker to the 
Basing on the former, the plan is focused on unblocking the reconstruction 
story first and then proceed with steady covering of our codebase with traces for the complex codepaths as well as 
metrics and dashboards for "measurables".

Fortunately, the "ShrEx" analysis can be performed with _tracing_ only(more on that in [Tracing](./#Tracing)), so the
decision for the celestia-node team is to cover with traces only the _necessary_ for the current "ShrEx" stack code as 
the initial response to the ADR, leaving the rest to be integrated in the background for the devs in the team once they 
are free as well as for the efficient bootstrapping into the code for the new devs.

> The next biggest priority - incentivized Testnet can be largely covered with traces as well. All participant will submit

Reviewer 3: Replicating the style of Tooling/Dependencies here will make the reading much easier
Smt like:

### Plan

#### First Priority

#### Second Priority

Author: On it

and props to @liamsi for initial kickoff and a deep dive into OpenTelemetry.

#### Tracing Backends

For tracing, there are 3 modern OSS tools that are recommended. All of them have bidirectional support with OpenTelemetry:
* [Uptrace](https://get.uptrace.dev/guide/#what-is-uptrace)
  * The most recent (~1 year)
  * The richest UI
  * Tight to Clickhouse DB
  * Made by OpenTelemetry
  * The most lightweight
* [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/)
  * The most mature
  * Started by Uber, now supported by CNCF
  * Supports multiple storages(ScyllaDB, InfluxDB, Amazon DynamoDB)
* [Graphana Tempo](https://grafana.com/oss/tempo/)
  * Deep integration with Graphana/Prometheus
  * Relatively new (~2 years)
  * Uses Azure, GCS, S3 or local disk for storage

Each of these backends can be used independently and depending on the use case. For us, these are main use cases: 
* Local development/debugging for the private network or even public network setup
> I am personally planning to set up the lightweight Uptrace for the local light node. Just to play around and observe 

> > things

Reviewer 3: Putting a note after 4 bullet points with what the author personally uses can save the readability. 
Or migrating this info to the `Other` section mentioning the section -> point of the use-case

Author: Got you, moved it below. Moving it to the Other section is fat from the context of the quote

* Data collection from the Testground test runs
* Bootstrappers monitoring infrastructure
* Data collection from the incentivized testnet participants

There is no strict decision on which of these backends and where to use. People taking ownership of any listed vectors
are free to use any recommended solution or any unlisted.

#### Metrics Backend

// WIP

## Design

### Tracing

Tracing allows to see _how_ any process progresses through different modules, APIs and networks, as well as timings of 
each operation and any events or errors as they occur.

A visual example of a generic tracing dashboard provided via [Uptrace](https://uptrace.dev/) backend
![tracing](img/tracing-dashboard.png)

Mainly, for "ShrEx" and reconstruction analysis we need to know if the reconstruction succeeded and the time it took.

> The tracing in this case would provide all three metrics for the whole reconstruction operation and for each sub operation of each

Reviewer 3: Explicitly mentioning what three metrics are can save the reader's time wondering. 
For e.g 
1 - reconstruction status
2 - reconstruction time
3 - ?

Author: I didn't made sub bullets here, but still improved and updated the paragraph with new info

process.

#### Spans
Span represents an operation (unit of work) in a trace. They keep the time when operation _started_ and _ended_. Any 
additional user defined _attributes_, operation status(success or error with an error itself) and events/logs that 
may happen during the operation.

Spans also form a parent tree, meaning that each span associated to a process can have multiple sub processes or child
spans and vise-versa. Altogether, this feature allows to see the whole trace of execution of any part of the system, no 
matter how complex it is. This is exactly what we need to analyze our reconstruction performance.

An example of a root span in `ipld.Retriever`:
```go
import "go.opentelemetry.io/otel"

var tracer = otel.Tracer("share")

func (r *Retriever) Retrieve(ctx context.Context, dah *da.DataAvailabilityHeader) (*rsmt2d.ExtendedDataSquare, error) {
  ctx, span := tracer.Start(ctx, "retrieve-square")
  defer span.End()

  span.SetAttributes(
    attribute.Int("size", len(dah.RowsRoots)),
    attribute.String("data_hash", hex.EncodeToString(dah.Hash())),
  )
  ...
}
```

The child span in `ipld.Retriever.Reconstruct`:
```go

> 	ctx, span := tracer.Start(ctx, "reconstruct-square")

Reviewer 4: According to [these docs](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/#event-name-reuse-prohibition), traces must have unique names:

> A new event MUST NOT be added with the same name as an event that existed in the past but was renamed (with a corresponding schema file).

> When introducing a new event name check all existing schema files to make sure the name does not appear as a key of any “rename_events” section (keys denote old event names in rename operations).

Should we be concerned that it may be difficult to maintain uniqueness of trace (and metric) names in the long-run if they are scattered throughout our codebase? Do you think it would aid maintainability to have a single file of constant trace (and metric) names so there is one location to check for existing names prior to adding a new name? Or would a centralized trace (and metric) name file be cumbersome to use?

Author: Good point. Note that each span name is prepended with a namespace of created root tracer, meaning that the full name of this span would be `ipld.reconstruct-square`

Author: Added more info about this.

    if err != nil {
        return nil, err
    }
	// then the tracer provider
    tp := tracesdk.NewTracerProvider(
        // Always be sure to batch in production.
        tracesdk.WithBatcher(exp),
        // Record information about this application in a Resource.
        tracesdk.WithResource(resource.NewWithAttributes(
            semconv.SchemaURL,
            semconv.ServiceNameKey.String(service),
            attribute.String("environment", environment),
            attribute.Int64("ID", id),
        )),
    )
	// and set it globally to be used across packages
    otel.SetTracerProvider(tp)
	
	// then close it elsewhere
    tp.Shutdown(ctx)
```

### Metrics

// WIP

## Considerations

* Tracing performance
  * _Every_ method calling two more functions making network request can affect overall performance

## Other

As you will see in the examples below, tracing looks similar to logging and have almost the same semantics. In fact,
tracing is debug logging on steroids, and we can potentially consider dropping conventional _debug_ logging once we 
fully cover our codebases with the tracing. Same as logging, traces can be pipe out into the stdout as prettyprinted
event log.

> 

Reviewer: I think additionally to the proposed Glossary a set of "further reading" links or "related links" would be good. E.g. the opentelemetry docs themselves are really great and the semantics of [metrics](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/) and [tracing](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/) are useful. Similarly the prometheus docs on metric naming could be useful for devs integrating metrics into node: https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/#metric-names or the intro docs to prometheus: https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/

Author: Good point. WIll add it

Author: done

code as the initial response to the ADR, leaving the rest to be integrated in the background for the devs in the team 
once they are free as well as for the efficient bootstrapping into the code for the new devs.

#### Second Priority

The next biggest priority - incentivized Testnet can be largely covered with traces as well. All participant will submit
traces from their nodes to any provided backend endpoint by us during the whole network lifespan. Later on, we will be 
able to verify the data of each participant by querying historical traces. This is the feature that some backend solutions 
provide, which we can use as well to extract valuable insight on how the network performs in macro view.

### Tooling/Dependencies

#### Golang API/Shim

The decision is to use [opentelemetry-go](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-go) for both Metrics and Tracing:
* Minimal and golang savvy API/shim which gathers years of experience from OpenCensus/OpenMetrics and [CNCF](https://www.cncf.io/)
* Backends/exporters for all the existing timeseries monitoring DBs, e.g. Prometheus, InfluxDB. As well as tracing backends
  Jaeger, Uptrace, etc.

> * https://github.com/uptrace/opentelemetry-go-extra/tree/main/otelzap with logging engine with use - Zap

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* https://github.com/uptrace/opentelemetry-go-extra/tree/main/otelzap with logging engine we use - Zap
```

additional user defined _attributes_, operation status(success or error with an error itself) and events/logs that
may happen during the operation.

Spans also form a parent tree, meaning that each span associated to a process can have multiple sub processes or child
spans and vice-versa. Altogether, this feature allows to see the whole trace of execution of any part of the system, no
matter how complex it is. This is exactly what we need to analyze our reconstruction performance.

#### Tracing Integration Example

First, we define global pkg level tracer to create spans from within `ipld` pkg. Basically, it groups spans under
common logical namespace and extends the full name of each span.

```go
var tracer = otel.Tracer("ipld")
```

Then, we define a root span in `ipld.Retriever`:

```go
import "go.opentelemetry.io/otel"

func (r *Retriever) Retrieve(ctx context.Context, dah *da.DataAvailabilityHeader) (*rsmt2d.ExtendedDataSquare, error) {
  ctx, span := tracer.Start(ctx, "retrieve-square")
  defer span.End()

  span.SetAttributes(
    attribute.Int("size", len(dah.RowsRoots)),
    attribute.String("data_hash", hex.EncodeToString(dah.Hash())),

>   )

Reviewer 6: Cardinality issue right here using datahash as attribute. The topic of high cardinality worth its own paragraph as it seems it happens to be encountered by devs from time to time.

* ___Histogram___ - synchronous instrument that produces a histogram from recorded values.
* ___CounterObserver___ - asynchronous instrument that measures additive non-decreasing values.
* ___UpDownCounterObserver___ - asynchronous instrument that measures additive values that can increase or decrease with time.
* ___GaugeObserver___ - asynchronous instrument that measures non-additive values for which sum does not produce a meaningful correct result.

#### Metrics Integration Example

Consider we want to report the current network height as a metric.

First of all, the global pkg meter has to be defined in the code related to the desired metric. In our case it is `header` pkg.

```go
var meter = global.MeterProvider().Meter("header")
```

Next, we should understand what instrument to use. On the first glance, for chain height a ___Counter___ instrument should
fit, as it is a non-decreasing value, and then we should think whether we need a sync or async version of it. For our case,
both would work and its more the question of precision we want. Sync metering would report every height change, while

> the async would poke `header` pkg API periodically to get the metered data. For our example, we will go with the latter.

Reviewer 6: This section is missing the point that Counter will be iterated from multiple sources, that might include same application being restarted. For specified case only async Gauge can be used to reflect current network height.

```go
// MonitorHead enables Otel metrics to monitor head.
func MonitorHead(store Store) {
 headC, _ := meter.AsyncInt64().Counter(
  "head",
  instrument.WithUnit(unit.Dimensionless),
  instrument.WithDescription("Subjective head of the node"),

>  )

Reviewer 6: Metrics API for Counter initialisation and async callbacks has changed, so examples are outdated

 err := meter.RegisterCallback(
  []instrument.Asynchronous{
   headC,
  },
  func(ctx context.Context) {
   head, err := store.Head(ctx)
   if err != nil {

>     headC.Observe(ctx, 0, attribute.String("err", err.Error()))

Reviewer 6: We should never use errors as attributes. It causes cardinality issues and is not useful, as it is impossible to query such errors from metrics

    return
   }

   headC.Observe(
    ctx,
    head.Height,
    attribute.Int("square_size", len(head.DAH.RowsRoots)),
   )
  },
 )
 if err != nil {
  panic(err)

>  }

Reviewer 6: Lets calm down here and panic 😆

The API-based approach should be followed for any info level metric. Even if there is no API to get the required metric,
such API should be introduced. However, this approach is not always possible and sometimes deeper integration with code
logic is necessary to analyze performance or there are security and/or encapsulation considerations.

On the example, we can also see how any additional data can be added to the instruments via attributes or labels. It is
important to add only absolutely necessary data(more on that in Others section below) to the metrics or data which is
common over multiple time-series. In this case, we attach `square_size` of the height to know the block size of the
height. This allows us to query reported heights with some square size using backend UI. Note that there are only
powers of two(with 256 being a current limit) as unique values possible for the metric, so it won't put pressure on the
metrics backend.
  
For Go code examples on other metric instruments consult [Uptrace Otel docs](https://uptrace.dev/opentelemetry/go-metrics.html#getting-started).

#### Backends Connection

Example for OTLP extracted from our code

> 

Reviewer 6: This example needs to be updated. Primaraly it misses global attributes we set:
- network name
- node type
- peer ID
Those are crucial for metrics query and filtering and must be a part of adr

> # ADR #009: Telemetry

Reviewer: Suggestion:
```suggestion
# ADR #009: Telemetry and General Observability via Tracing and Metrics
```

## Changelog

* 2022-07-04: Started
* 2022-07-10: Initial Draft finished
* 2022-07-11: Stylistic improvements from @renaynay
* 2022-07-14: Stylistic improvements from @liamsi
* 2022-07-15: Stylistic improvements from @rootulp and @bidon15
* 2022-07-29: Formatting fixes
* 2022-07-29: Clarify and add more info regarding Uptrace
* 2022-08-09: Cover metrics and add more info about trace

## Authors

@Wondertan @liamsi

## Glossary

* `ShrEx` - P2P Share Exchange Stack

> It's all ogre now

## Context

> > Now I know why I don't like writing ADRs - because I cannot run/test them and see if they work or not.
> > Hoping that quality team feedback will solve this problem!
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  * Unfortunately, does not support OTLP
* [Uptrace](https://get.uptrace.dev/guide/#what-is-uptrace)
  * The most recent (~1 year)
  * Tight to Clickhouse DB
  * The most lightweight
  * Supports OTLP
  * OSS and can be deployed locally
  * Provides hosted solution
* Prometheus+Graphana
  * Pull based
  * No native OTLP support
    * Thought there [spec](https://github.com/open-telemetry/wg-prometheus/blob/main/specification.md) to fix this
  * Still, can be used with Otel Collector

Similarly, no strictness around backend solution with only OTLP support requirement. Natively or through OTLP exporter.

## Design

### Tracing Design

Tracing allows to see _how_ any process progresses through different modules, APIs and networks, as well as timings of
each operation and any events or errors as they occur.

A visual example of a generic tracing dashboard provided via [Uptrace](https://uptrace.dev/) backend
![tracing](img/tracing-dashboard.png)

Mainly, for `ShrEx` and reconstruction analysis we need to know if the reconstruction succeeded and the time it took for
the big block sizes(EDS >= 128). The tracing in this case would provide all the data for the whole reconstruction

> operation and for each sub operation within reconstruction, e.g time spend specifically on erasure coding

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
operation and for each sub operation within reconstruction, e.g time spent specifically on erasure coding
```

> NOTE: The exact compute time is not available unless [rsmt2d#107](https://github.com/celestiaorg/rsmt2d/issues/107)
> is fixed.

#### Spans

Span represents an operation (unit of work) in a trace. They keep the time when operation _started_ and _ended_. Any
additional user defined _attributes_, operation status(success or error with an error itself) and events/logs that
may happen during the operation.

Spans also form a parent tree, meaning that each span associated to a process can have multiple sub processes or child

> spans and vise-versa. Altogether, this feature allows to see the whole trace of execution of any part of the system, no

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
spans and vice-versa. Altogether, this feature allows to see the whole trace of execution of any part of the system, no
```

            attribute.Int64("ID", id),
        )),
    )
 // and set it globally to be used across packages
    otel.SetTracerProvider(tp)
 
 // then close it elsewhere
    tp.Shutdown(ctx)
```

We decided to use OTLP backend, and it is almost similar in terms of setup.

### Metrics Design

Metrics allows collecting time-series data from different measurable points in the application. Every measurable can
be covered via 6 instruments OpenTelemetry provides:

* ___Counter___ - synchronous instrument that measures additive non-decreasing values.
* ___UpDownCounter___ - synchronous instrument which measures additive values that increase or decrease with time.
* ___Histogram___ - synchronous instrument that produces a histogram from recorded values.
* ___CounterObserver___ - asynchronous instrument that measures additive non-decreasing values.
* ___UpDownCounterObserver___ - asynchronous instrument that measures additive values that can increase or decrease with time.
* ___GaugeObserver___ - asynchronous instrument that measures non-additive values for which sum does not produce a meaningful correct result.

#### Metrics Integration Example

> Consider we want to know report current network height as a metric.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Consider we want to report the current network height as a metric.
```

insides, which is nice and keeps metering decoupled from business logic. The `MonitorHead` func simply accepts the `Store`
interface and reads the information about the latest subjective header via `Head` on the node.

The API-based approach should be followed for any info level metric. Even if there is no API to get the required metric,
such API should be introduced. However, this approach is not always possible and sometimes deeper integration with code
logic is necessary to analyze performance or there are security and/or encapsulation considerations.

On the example, we can also see how any additional data can be added to the instruments via attributes or labels. It is
important to add only absolutely necessary data(more on that in Others section below) to the metrics or data which is
common over multiple time-series. In this case, we attach `square_size` of the height to know the block size of the
height. This allows us to query reported heights with some square size using backend UI. Note that there are only
powers of two(with 256 being a current limit) as unique values possible for the metric, so it won't put pressure on the
metrics backend.
  

> For in Go code examples on other metric instruments consult [Uptrace Otel docs](https://uptrace.dev/opentelemetry/go-metrics.html#getting-started).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For Go code examples on other metric instruments consult [Uptrace Otel docs](https://uptrace.dev/opentelemetry/go-metrics.html#getting-started).
```

      )),
  )
```

## Considerations

* Tracing performance
  * _Every_ method calling two more functions making network request can affect overall performance
* Metrics backend performance
  * Mainly, we should avoid sending too much data to the metrics backend through labels. Metrics is only for metrics and
not for indexing.
e.g. hash, uuid, etc not to overload the metrics backend
* Security and exported data protection
  * OTLP provides TLS support

## Other Findings

### Labels and High Cardinality

High cardinality(many different label values) issue should be always kept in mind while introducing new metrics
and labels for them. Each metric should be attached with only absolutely necessary labels and stay away from metrics
sending label __unique__ values each time, e.g. hash, uuid, etc. Doing the opposite can dramatically increase the
amount of data stored. See <https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/#labels>.

### Tracing and Logging

As you will see in the examples below, tracing looks similar to logging and have almost the same semantics. In fact,
tracing is debug logging on steroids, and we can potentially consider dropping conventional _debug_ logging once we

> fully cover our codebases with the tracing. Same as logging, traces can be pipe out into the stdout as prettyprinted

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
fully cover our codebases with the tracing. Same as logging, traces can be piped out into the stdout as prettyprinted
```

event log.

### Uptrace

It turns out that running only Uptrace locally Collector is PITA. It requires either:

* Using their [uptrace-go](https://github.com/uptrace/uptrace-go/blob/master/example/metrics/main.go) custom OTel wrapper
  * For some undocumented reason they decided to go with a custom wrapper while it's possible to use OTel with Uptrace
directly
* The direct usage though also requires additional frictions and does not work with defaults. Requires:
  * Token auth to send data
  * Custom URL and path
  * Maintaining config for itself and clickhouse

> Overall, it is not user-friendly alternative to known projects, even thought it still does not require running Otel

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Overall, it is not user-friendly alternative to known projects, even though it still does not require running Otel
```
